Registration auditability requirements (#200) (#213)
ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture: draft-ietf-scitt-architecture.md

Registration Policies and trust anchors MUST be made transparent and available to all Relying Parties of the Transparency Service by registering them as Signed Statements on the Append-only Log, and distributing the associated Receipts.

This specification leaves implementation, encoding and documentation of Registration Policies and trust anchors to the operator of the Transparency Service.

#### Mandatory Registration Checks

During registration, a Transparency Service MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its currently configured trust anchors, using the `x5t` (34), `x5chain`(33) or `kid`(4) protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.
For instance, in order to authenticate X.509 Signed Statements, the Transparency Service MUST build and validate a complete certificate chain from the Issuer's certificate identified by `x5t`, to one of the root certificates most recently registered as a trust anchor of the Transparency Service.

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the Registration Policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.

Author: @robinbryce if you are concerned about the lack of prescribed window for applying policy updates this could be weakened
```suggestion
The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the most recently registered Registration Policy for which a Receipt has been distributed.
```
This allows more asynchronous registration policy update, the TS can withhold the Receipt until it is ready to enable the new policy

Reviewer: FAOD: I'm essentially ok with this PR for what that is worth. If we get something like ad suggests, which I belive avoids all the bootstrappy and ordering implications, I think I'm starting to like registration policies. But as long as they block registration, I'm anticipating many "well intentioned" and also "good" implementations wont benefit much from them.

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the Registration Policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the Registration Policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log at the time of registration.
```

The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the Registration Policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.

#### Auditability of Registration

The operator of a Transparency Service MAY update the Registration Policy or the trust anchors of a Transparency Service at any time.

Transparency Services MUST ensure that for any Transparent Statment they accept, enough information is made available to Auditors (either in the Append-only Log and retrievable through audit APIs, or included in the Receipt) to identify and recover the Transparent Statements describing the registration policy and trust anchors that are applicable to the Transparent Statement.

### Initialization and bootstrapping {#ts-initialization}

Since the mandatory registration checks rely on having registered Signed Statements for the registration policy and trust anchors, Transparency Services MUST support at least one of the three following bootstrapping mechanisms:

> - A built-in default Registration Policy and initial list of trust anchors;

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to revert this line
```suggestion
- A built-in default Registration Policy
```

Reviewer 2: looking for feedback with a +1 or -1 to merge or discard

Reviewer 3: +1 on reverting

Author: -1 the trust anchors are as important (in fact probably more important) than the registration policy for trusting the TS. Imagine the operator adds his own self-signed root CA suddenly, then he can impersonate any issuer

Reviewer: +1 revert. A TS impersonating an  issuer sounds like an attack to me, so why would I trust any anchors it self registers ?

> - Acceptance of a first Signed Statement whose payload is a valid Registration Policy and trust anchors, omitting the normal registration checks;

Reviewer 3: +1

> - An out-of-band authenticated management interface to configure the registration policy and trust anchors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- An out-of-band authenticated management interface
```

Reviewer 3: +1

> Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies which govern whether or not a given Signed Statement is eligible for registration.

Reviewer: I still don't see the utility of requirement to apply registration policies *on registration* for interoperability. Provided we are clear about the difference between a database of transparent statements and the verifiable datastracture that makes them tamper evident, there is no realy value in requiring a check before entry. And this apparent losening actually allows for more powerful retrospective analysis based on transparent statements about policy. Transparent retrospective policies can perfectly well reference the commitments of signed statements to append only logs even after the pre image data has been put beyond use (to counter posoning or satisfy legal requests). 
```suggestion
Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies which govern whether or not a given Signed Statement is considered acceptable. These policies may retrospectively apply to previously registered signed statements which have been redacted.```
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: Very useful perspective you might want to clean up the code block offset at the bottom for merge.

```suggestion
Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies which govern whether or not a given Signed Statement is considered acceptable. These policies may retrospectively apply to previously registered signed statements which have been redacted.
```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```
I propose we remove the last remark on retrospective applications of policies. As detailed in the mail thread, this remark generally applies to some other policies that may be supported by the TS, but not to the registration policy as defined in the architecture. If need be, let's open a separate issue or PR to explain them in relation to auditing.

Reviewer: yep, agree. especially if we get ories change below (for line 389 -> "Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies.")

> Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies which govern whether or not a given Signed Statement is eligible for registration.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Transparency Services MUST maintain Registration Policies.
```

Reviewer 6: Rely on definitions, instead of repeating purpose of defined terms.

Transparency Services MUST also maintain a list of trust anchors used to authenticate Issuers, which MAY be included in the registration policy statement.
For instance, a trust anchor could be an X.509 root certificate, the discovery URL of an OpenID Connect identity provider, or any other COSE compatible PKI trust anchor.

> 

Reviewer: nice

> Registration Policies and trust anchors MUST be made transparent and available to all clients of the Transparency Service by registering them as Signed Statements on the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Registration Policies and trust anchors MUST be made transparent and available to all authorised clients of the Transparency Service by registering them as Signed Statements on the Append-only Log.
```

Reviewer 7: I think we'll find pushback from the user community if ANY client can get hold of ALL trust anchor details without even a nod to auth.

This specification leaves implementation, encoding and documentation of Registration Policies and trust anchors to the operator of the Transparency Service.

#### Mandatory Registration Checks

> During registration, a Transparency Services MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its configured trust anchors, using the `x5t` (34), `x5chain`(33) and `kid`(4) protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
During registration, a Transparency Service MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its configured trust anchors, using the `x5t` (34), `x5chain`(33) or `kid`(4) protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.
```

> During registration, a Transparency Services MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its configured trust anchors, using the `x5t`, `x5chain` and `kid` protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.

Reviewer 6: are you sure you want both `x5t` and `x5chain` ?

Author: The benefit of "x5chain" is that you don't have to find or communicate the Issuer certificate to the relying party or the auditor if they want to re-check the signature. I don't see the harm in supporting it

> During registration, a Transparency Services MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its configured trust anchors, using the `x5t`, `x5chain` and `kid` protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
During registration, a Transparency Services MUST, at a minimum, authenticate the Issuer of the Signed Statement by validating the COSE signature and checking the identity of the issuer against one of its configured trust anchors, using the `x5t` (34), `x5chain`(33) and `kid`(4) protected headers of the Signed Statement as hints.
```

> For instance, for X.509 signed claims, the Transparency Service must build and validate a complete certificate chain from the Issuer's certificate identified by `x5t`, to one of the root certificates most recently registered as a trust anchor of the Transparency Service.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For instance, for X.509 signed claims, the Transparency Service MUST build and validate a complete certificate chain from the Issuer's certificate identified by `x5t`, to one of the root certificates most recently registered as a trust anchor of the Transparency Service.
```

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the registration policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.

Reviewer: I don't think this MUST is compatible with an eventualy consistent world.

Reviewer 6: its vague enough to be eventually true.

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the registration policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the Registration Policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log.
```

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the registration policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log for instance-specific registration checks.

Reviewer 6: can we define "recent", is that a logical time or lamport time? 

What is an "instance-specific registration check" ?

Author: recent = latest added to the append only log, do you think this needs to be explicit?

"instance-specific registration check" just means "registration policy"

Reviewer: If we need to be specific about ranges of time, lamport order is pretty rigid and also essentially up to the trust service. Can we do something like "Mininum Merge Delay"

```suggestion
If the transparency service subjects signed statements to registration policies at time of registration, it MUST declare the maximum delay from accepting the policy to it being applicable to future statements.
```

> The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the registration policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log for instance-specific registration checks.

Author: ```suggestion
The Transparency Service MUST evaluate the registration policy that was most recently added to the Append-only Log
```

#### Auditability of Registration

> The operator of a Transparency Service MAY update the Registration Policy or the trust anchors of a Transparency Service at any time.

Reviewer 2: Reviving Orie's [comment](https://github.com/ietf-wg-scitt/draft-ietf-scitt-architecture/pull/213#discussion_r1508140415) as GitHub hid it after fixing some formating changes

Reviewer 3: Good catch

Author: @fournet
```suggestion
The operator of a Transparency Service MAY request to update the Registration Policy or the trust anchors of a Transparency Service at any time.
```

> The operator of a Transparency Service MAY update the registration policy or the trust anchors of a transparency service at any time.

Reviewer 6: Consider adding a "SHOULD when", or "MUST when" after this MAY.

> This presents a challenge to Auditors and Relying Parties if they cannot determine what policy was used to register a given Transparent Statement.

Reviewer 2: Would prefer text that isn't conversational, discussing problems, as opposed to stating how the spec provides solutions.

> This presents a challenge to Auditors and Relying Parties if they cannot determine what policy was used to register a given Transparent Statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 8: I agree Steve. The party operating the Transparency Service and Registry must implement an auditable process for integrity verification. A lot can happen before an item is inserted into the block chain or database.

FYI: I'm meeting with the FCC on March 21 to talk about SCITT and the need for a Trust Registry for the US Cyber Trust Mark. Hopefully we will have the architecture close by the time I have this meeting.

Reviewer 7: This sentence is redundant. Support the removal.

> Transparency Services MUST ensure that for any Transparent Statment they accept, enough information is made available to Auditors (either in the Append-only Log and retrievable through audit APIs, or included in the Receipt) to identify and recover the Transparent Statements describing the registration policy and trust anchors that were in use at the time that Transparent Statement was registered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Transparency Services MUST ensure that for any Transparent Statment they accept, enough information is made available to Auditors (either in the Append-only Log and retrievable through audit APIs, or included in the Receipt) to identify and recover the Transparent Statements describing the registration policy and trust anchors that are applicable  to the Transparent Statement.```

Reviewer 4: Might want to remove the ` ``` ` from the code block at the end or this will junk it up.

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

Suggest complete removal. This sentence doesn't add anything and the ambiguity just makes it confusing. The document already has the requirement to register and make the trust anchors transparent, that's enough.

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Author: I agreee it is phrased ambiguously, trying to avoid being too prescriptive on implementers and giving them several possible opt-outs. If you think you can do better please provide an alternative

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer: I could live with this I think.

```suggestion
The trust anchor used to verify its Issuer MUST be registered with the Transparency Service in order that it is available to Auditors. It MAY be registered at any time.
```

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer 6: I don't this we should write MUST statements regarding Transparency Service policies like this.

I think policies should be out of scope.

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer 8: Would a revoked "trust anchor" certificate have any effect on the statements contained on the chain? Would all of the statement still remain valid in the event of a revoked certificate?

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer 4: Well I know there has been chatter about encoding a hash of the cert chain versus the whole thing and now this question posed by Dick. This leads to a problem, what if the certificates no longer exist, are not just recorded but presently invalid?

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer 8: Spot on AJ. Another problem we see is the inability to verify a certificate using OSCP. Things go wrong. What is the "failsafe" position in the "state machine" for the Transparency Service when things go wrong?

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Reviewer: SHOULD works for me. I only used MUST because I thought there was an appetite for normative requirements here

> In particular, this information SHOULD enable Auditors to re-validate the mandatory Issuer authentication check, unless the required information isn't available (e.g. the authentication protocol is not verifiable), or it is confidential (e.g. an OAuth access token embedding the Issuer's pubic key), or it is private (e.g. a Issuer certificate containing the name and email address of a developer).

Author: It is completely OK if the certificate used to sign a statement is revoked or expires after the statement is registered. The point of the "SHOULD" is that the evidence to prove that the certificate was valid (e.g. the intermediate CAs, the valid OCSP certificate with a timestamp around registration time) should be available to Auditors so they can retrospectively verify that the signature was valid at registration.

### Initialization and bootstrapping {#ts-initialization}

Since the mandatory registration checks rely on having registered Signed Statements for the registration policy and trust anchors, Transparency Services MUST support at least one of the three following bootstrapping mechanisms:

> - A built-in default Registration Policy and initial list of trust anchors;

Author: That text was already there, I only extended it to cover both registration policy and trust anchors (which was implicit before). But your point still stands that this text does not really use proper normative language, maybe create a separate issue about it?

> - A built-in default Registration Policy and initial list of trust anchors;

Reviewer 4: We say default in the preexisting language and indicates you propose adding "and initial list of trust anchors;" to the end and that would be default too, correct? I am saying if we are going to say that we ought to be explicit about if we are committing to that.

I for one am saying I am not sure we should, we see what others say.

Profiles and implementation specific choices should be used to determine admissability of conforming messages.
This specification is left intentionally open to allow implementations to make the restrictions that make the most sense for their operational use cases.

At least one identifier for an identity document MUST be included in the protected header of the COSE envelope, as one of `x5t`, `x5chain` or `kid`.

- Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.

> - Support for `kid` is optional.

Author: ```suggestion
- Support for `kid` and `x5chain` is optional.
```

> Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.

Author: ```suggestion
- Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.
```

> - Support for `x5t` and `x5chain` is mandatory to implement.

Author: ```suggestion
Support for `x5t` is mandatory to implement.
```
